5 Automations to Level-Up Your Blog with Directus (#243)
directus-labs/guest-authoring: automations-to-level-up-your-blog-with-directus/index.md

---
title: '5 Automations to Level-Up Your Blog with Directus'

> description: 'This article shows five automation strategies that will level up you blog running on Directus'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Learn how to automate translation, content publishing, alerts, summary writing, and hooking up your blog to the world of integrations provided by Zapier.'
```

author:
  name: 'Muhammed Ali'
  avatar_file_name: 'avatar.jpg'
---

> ## Introduction
> Maintaining a blog requires more than just compelling content; some aspects of efficiency and automation may be required. 
> This article shows five automation strategies that will level up you blog running on Directus, allowing you to focus more on content creation and less on the intricacies of blog management.
> 
> ## Before You Start
> 
> You will need:
> 
> - [DeepL](https://www.deepl.com/) API key for Language translation.
> - [OpenAI](https://openai.com/) key for SEO summary.
> 
> In your Directus project, create a new collection called `content` and `comment` with the following fields:
> For `content`:
> 
> - `SEO_summary`: Textarea, string
> - `comment`: one to many, comment
> - `approved`: Radio Buttons, Choices: yes, no, Default Value: no
> 
> Do not add the fields to be translated like `title` or `detail` yet, because those will be stored in a separate collection. Follow this [guide](https://docs.directus.io/guides/headless-cms/content-translations.html) on how to set up your collection for translation.
> For `comment`:
> - `content`: many to one, content
> - `comment`: Textarea, string

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Maintaining a blog requires more than just compelling content; there's a lot of other manual work or processes that may need to be set up. 

This article shows five automation ideas that will level up your blog powered by Directus, allowing you to focus more on content creation and less on the intricacies of blog management.

## Before You Start

You will need:

- A Directus project - [follow our quickstart guide](https://docs.directus.io/getting-started/quickstart) if you don't already have one.
- A [DeepL](https://www.deepl.com/) API key for translation.
- An [OpenAI](https://openai.com/) key for generating search engine optimized summaries of your content.

In your Directus project, create a new collection called `content` and `comment` with the following fields:

For `content`:

- `seo_summary`: Textarea, string
- `comment`: one to many, comment
- `approved`: Radio Buttons, Choices: yes, no, Default Value: no

Do not add the fields to be translated like `title` or `detail` yet, because those will be stored in a separate collection. Follow [this translation guide](https://docs.directus.io/guides/headless-cms/content-translations) to set up your multilingual project.

For `comment`:
- `content`: many to one, content
- `comment`: Textarea, string
```

> ## 1. Automated Translation of New Posts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Automate the Translation of Your Content
```

> ![translation of new post](ai-translation.png)

Reviewer: Please write a detailed alt text that explains what a reader would see in this image.

> Expanding your blog's reach to non-English speaking audiences can be daunting. Automated translations ensure that every new post is available in multiple languages simultaneously, reaching a global audience requires content in multiple languages.
> In this section, you will learn how to automate translation from English to French, then updating the article that was just created or updated with the new data 
> Here we will translate the detail section of the blog, but you can also use this method to create a translation for the title in another flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automated translations ensure that every new post is available in multiple languages simultaneously, helping you be more accessible to a global audience.

Before continuing, add a `translation` field in your `content` collection with a `title` and `detail` field, if you haven't already.

We will automate translation from English to French, then update the article that was just created or updated. While we will translate only the `detail` section of the blog, but you can also use this method to create a translations for more fields.
```

### How to Implement
First, install the AI translator marketplace extension in Directus.
Go to the **Flows** tab and create a new flow, give it any name you like. 
Create a flow to trigger translation upon creating or updating a post and select the content collection. 
The trigger will only return the `key` of the content, but the whole post is needed for DeepL. Create a **Read Data** operation and give it full access permissions. On the “Content Translations” collection, access the following query:

> 
> ```json
> {
>     "filter": {
>         "_or": [
>             {
>                 "_and": [
>                     {
>                         "content_id": {
>                             "_eq": "{{$trigger.keys[0]}}"
>                         }
>                     },
>                     {
>                         "languages_code": {
>                             "_eq": "en-US"
>                         }
>                     }
>                 ]
>             },
>             {
>                 "_and": [
>                     {
>                         "content_id": {
>                             "_eq": "{{$trigger.key}}"
>                         }
>                     },
>                     {
>                         "languages_code": {
>                             "_eq": "en-US"
>                         }
>                     }
>                 ]
>             }
>         ]
>     }
> }
> ```
> 
> If a content is updated, the key is found at `{{$trigger.keys[0]}}` and if a content is created, the key is found at `{{$trigger.key}}`
> So basically the query is saying that the operation should filter for when `content_id` in Content Translations is equal to (`_eq`) `{{$trigger.keys[0]}}` and then grab the en-US version. Or filter for when `content_id` in Content Translations is equal to (`_eq`) `{{$trigger.key}}` and then grab the en-US version.
> The output will be the article you just created or updated.
> Now add the **AI Translation** operation with full access permission and put in your DeepL API key and select the plan. Put `{{$last[0].detail}}` in the Text form and then select the language.
> 
> Now we can save the French output by adding the **Create Data** operation on the **Content Translations** collection with full access permission. Use the payload:
> 
> ```json
> {
>     "content_id": "{{$trigger.keys[0]}}",
>     "languages_code": "fr-FR",
>     "detail": "{{$last}}"
> }
> ```
> 
> :::info Box title
> 
> Before attaching new operations, it is best practice to check what the payload output looks like.
> 
> :::
> 
> You can test this out by creating new content. After a few seconds, the French version will be populated. You can do the same for the title.

Reviewer: ````suggestion

This automation relies on the AI Translator extension, which you can download from the Directus Marketplace and is published by the Directus team.

Create a new flow with an event trigger. The scope should be `items.create` and `items.update` on the `content` collection. 

The trigger will only return the `key` of the content, but we require the `detail` field. Create a **Read Data** operation and give it full access permissions. On the "Content Translations" collection, access the following query:

```json
{
    "filter": {
        "_or": [
            {
                "_and": [
                    {
                        "content_id": {
                            "_eq": "{{$trigger.keys[0]}}"
                        }
                    },
                    {
                        "languages_code": {
                            "_eq": "en-US"
                        }
                    }
                ]
            },
            {
                "_and": [
                    {
                        "content_id": {
                            "_eq": "{{$trigger.key}}"
                        }
                    },
                    {
                        "languages_code": {
                            "_eq": "en-US"
                        }
                    }
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

The query filters for records in Content Translations where the `content_id` matches <span v-pre>`{{$trigger.keys[0]}}`</span> (when an updated item) or <span v-pre>`{{$trigger.key}}`</span> (when a newly-created item), and retrieves the `en-US` version. The **Read Data** returns the full article that was just created or updated.

Now add the **AI Translation** operation with full access permission. Enter your DeepL API key and select the appropriate plan. In the **Text** input, insert <span v-pre>`{{$last[0].detail}}`</span> and then choose the desired language.

Now we can save the French output by adding the **Create Data** operation on the **Content Translations** collection with full access permission. Use the payload:

```json
{
    "content_id": "{{$trigger.keys[0]}}",
    "languages_code": "fr-FR",
    "detail": "{{$last}}"
}
```

You can test this out by creating new content. After a few seconds, the French version will be populated. You can do the same for the title.
````

![AI translated content](translated-content.png)

> ## 2. Automate Content Publishing Workflow on Approval
> ![Flow to publish article](publish-article.png)
> 
> As a blog manager, you're often juggling multiple tasks. By setting up an automated publishing workflow in Directus, once a post is reviewed and approved by a superior, it gets published immediately. This automation eliminates the back-and-forth of manual scheduling and reduces the risk of human error.
> Since we are not working with frontend here, we can simulate publishing by returning the title and detail as output.
> 
> ### How to Implement
> Create a flow to trigger upon updating a post and select the content collection. 
> Now add a **Read Data** operation attached to the Content Translations collection with the ID `{{$trigger.keys[0]}}`.  This will return the payload that includes the `title` and `detail` of the content that was just updated. If you look at the payload, this data does not come with the value for `approved`, this is because it is saved in the `content` collection. So we need to use the **Read Data** operation again, but this time we will attach to the `content` collection with the ID `{{$trigger.keys[0]}}`.
> Now use the Run Script operation to run the following JavaScript code:
> ```javascript
> module.exports = async function(data) {
>     // Initialize an empty result object
>     let result = {};
> 
>     // Check if "approved" is "yes"
>     if (data.item_read_rif6q.approved === "yes") {
>         // Publish the article title and detail
>         result = {
>             title: data.item_read_6grfu.title,
>             detail: data.item_read_6grfu.detail
>         };
>     } else {
>         result = {
>             status: "Not Approved for Publishing"
>         };
>     }
>     
>     return result;
> };
> ```
> 
> In the code above, `item_read_rif6q` and `item_read_6grfu` are the keys for the Read Data operations, so yours might be different since they are automatically generated.
> This is what your output will look like this when a content is approved:
> ```json
> {
>     "title": "Reasons why automating delivery could be a bad idea ",
>     "detail": "Lack of Human Oversight:\nAutomated systems can lack the nuanced judgment that humans provide. Critical decisions might require human intervention to account for context, unexpected situations, or complex problem-solving...."
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Automate Content Publishing Once Approved

![Flow to publish article](publish-article.png)

As a blog manager, you frequently juggle multiple tasks. By setting up an automated publishing workflow in Directus, once a post is reviewed and approved, it gets published immediately. This automation eliminates the back-and-forth of manual scheduling and reduces the risk of human error.

Since we are not working with the frontend, we can simulate publishing by returning the title and details as output.

Create a flow to trigger upon updating a post and select the content collection. 

Add a **Read Data** operation with the key of `read_translation` attached to the **Content Translations** collection with the ID <span v-pre>`{{$trigger.keys[0]}}`</span>. This will return the payload that includes the `title` and `detail` of the content that was just updated. If you examine the payload, you'll notice that the `approved` value is not included, as it is saved in the `content` collection. 

To retrieve this information, you'll need to use the **Read Data** operation again, this time attached to the `content` collection with the ID <span v-pre>`{{$trigger.keys[0]}}`</span>.

Now use the **Run Script** operation to run the following JavaScript code:

```javascript
module.exports = async function(data) {
    // Initialize an empty result object
    let result = {};

    // Check if "approved" is "yes"
    if (data.read_translation.approved === "yes") {
        // Publish the article title and detail
        result = {
            title: data.read_translation.title,
            detail: data.read_translation.detail
        };
    } else {
        result = {
            status: "Not Approved for Publishing"
        };
    }
    
    return result;
};
```

This is what your output will look like this when a content is approved:

```json
{
    "title": "Reasons why automating delivery could be a bad idea ",
    "detail": "Lack of Human Oversight:\nAutomated systems can lack the nuanced judgment that humans provide. Critical decisions might require human intervention to account for context, unexpected situations, or complex problem-solving...."
}
```
````

This isn't implemented using the correct operations. There is a Conditional operation - use that instead. If it resolves (succeeds), you should probably just share this existing docs post on [using Netlify/Vercel build triggers](https://docs.directus.io/guides/headless-cms/trigger-static-builds/netlify.html#configure-netlify-build-hook)

> ## 3. Configuring Alerts for New Comments
> ![comment alert](comment-alert.png)
> 
> As your blog grows, monitoring comments manually becomes impractical. Automated alerts ensure that you and your team are notified of new comments instantly, enabling prompt responses and community engagement.
> In this section, you will learn how to set up a flow to send comments email to a specified email.  
> 
> :::info Box title
> 
> If you are self-hosting a Directus instance, you will need to set up the [email service configuration](https://docs.directus.io/self-hosted/config-options.html#email).
> 
> :::
> ### How to Implement
> Create a flow to trigger email upon creating a comment and select the `comment` collection. 
> Now add a **Read Data** operation attached to the Content Translations collection with the ID `{{$trigger.payload.content}}`.  This will return the comment that was just created. Now attach the **Send Email** operation. In the **To** section input the email addresses you want the notification to go to.
> **Subject**:  Comment for on article "{{get_article_comment.title}}"
> **Type**: Markdown
> **Body**: 
> 
>     Hello, there is a comment for the article "{{get_article_comment.title}}"
>     > {{$trigger.payload.comment}}
> ![email alert](email-alert.png)

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## 3. Configuring Alerts for New Comments

![comment alert](comment-alert.png)

As your blog grows, monitoring comments manually becomes impractical. Automated alerts ensure that you and your team are notified of new comments instantly, enabling prompt responses and community engagement.

In this section, you will learn how to set up an automation to send comments email to a specified email.  

This automation assumed that comments are either collected directly in your Directus project, or that they are synced/pushed via an integration.

:::info Email Setup

If you are self-hosting a Directus instance, you will need to set up the [email service configuration](https://docs.directus.io/self-hosted/config-options.html#email).

:::

Create a flow to trigger email upon creating a comment and select the `comment` collection. 

Now add a **Read Data** operation attached to the Content Translations collection with the ID <span v-pre>{{$trigger.payload.content}}`</span>. This will return the comment that was just created. Now attach the **Send Email** operation. In the **To** section input the email addresses you want the notification to go to.

```
**Subject**:  Comment for on article "{{get_article_comment.title}}"
**Type**: Markdown
**Body**: 
    Hello, there is a comment for the article "{{get_article_comment.title}}"
    > {{$trigger.payload.comment}}
```

![email alert](email-alert.png)
````

> ## 4. Automatic SEO Summary Writing
> 
> ![AI SEO summary](seo-summary.png)
> Writing SEO summaries can be time-consuming and repetitive. By leveraging the AI Writer marketplace extension, you can automatically generate keyword-rich summaries, improving your blog's SEO performance and freeing up time for more creative tasks.
> 
> ### How to Implement
> Install the AI Writer marketplace extension in Directus.
> Create a flow to trigger upon creating a post and select the content collection. The trigger will only return the `key` of the content, but the whole post is needed to send to OpenAI. Create a **Read Data** operation and give it full access permissions. On the “Content Translations” collection, access the following query:
> 
> ```json
> {
>     "filter": {
>         "_and": [
>             {
>                 "content_id": {
>                     "_eq": "{{$trigger.key}}"
>                 }
>             },
>             {
>                 "languages_code": {
>                     "_eq": "en-US"
>                 }
>             }
>         ]
>     }
> }
> ```
> 
> Now you can pass the content to OpenAI by creating an AI writer operation, input your OpenAI key, select the **GPT model** you want to use and **Prompt** as Create SEO Description. The Text will be gotten at `{{$last[0].detail}}`.
> We can now update the content collection with the newly created SEO description using Update Data operation. The ID tag will be `{{$trigger.key}}`.
> Now the creation of content will result in the generation of the SEO description.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Automatically Write SEO-Optimized Summaries

![AI SEO summary](seo-summary.png)

Writing SEO summaries can be time-consuming and repetitive. By using the AI Writer extension, available in the Directus Marketplace, you can automatically generate keyword-rich summaries, improving your blog's SEO performance and freeing up time for more creative tasks.

Once you've installed the AI Writer extension, create a flow to trigger upon creating a post and select the content collection. 

The trigger will only return the `key` of the content, but the whole post is needed to send to OpenAI. Create a **Read Data** operation and give it full access permissions. On the “Content Translations” collection, access the following query:

```json
{
    "filter": {
        "_and": [
            {
                "content_id": {
                    "_eq": "{{$trigger.key}}"
                }
            },
            {
                "languages_code": {
                    "_eq": "en-US"
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

Pass the content to OpenAI by creating an **AI writer** operation. Input your OpenAI key, select the **GPT model** you want to use and **Prompt** as Create SEO Description. The Text will be gotten at <span v-pre>`{{$last[0].detail}}`</span>.

Update the content collection with the newly created SEO description using **Update Data** operation - the ID tag will be <span v-pre>`{{$trigger.key}}`</span>. You can now save the summary back to the item.
````

> ## 5. Automate Content Promotion on Socials
> ![social post](social-post.png)
> 
> You will need to post your article on social media platforms for promotion. In this section, you will learn how to send the post from SEO summary to Zapier where you can automate publishing to the platform of your choice.
> We will use [Zap’s webhook URL](https://help.zapier.com/hc/en-us/articles/8496288690317-Trigger-Zaps-from-webhooks) so get one from Zapier.
> 
> ### How to Implement
> Create a flow to manually trigger on the Item page in the content collection. Now, create a **Read Data** operation, on the “Content” collection, use the ID at `{{$trigger.body.keys[0]}}`.
> Finally, create a Webhook/Request URL operation with the POST method and paste in your Zapier hook URL. Request Body will be `{{item_read_cx40l.SEO_summary}}`
> Replace `item_read_cx40l` with the keys of the Read Data operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Connect to the World of Zapier Integrations

![social post](social-post.png)

Zapier is a wonderful automation tool with thousands of pre-built integrations. While Directus Automate is powerful, it's useful to recognize when integrating with other tools ends up being more efficient. 

Create a Zap with a [Webhook Trigger URL](https://help.zapier.com/hc/en-us/articles/8496288690317-Trigger-Zaps-from-webhooks). Once you have this, data can be sent to Zapier from Directus.

Create a flow to manually trigger on the Item page in the content collection. Now, create a **Read Data** operation, on the “Content” collection, use the ID at <span v-pre>`{{$trigger.body.keys[0]}}`</span>.

Create a **Webhook/Request URL** operation with the POST method and paste in your Zapier hook URL. You can add any data required by your Zap in the body. 

Examples of what you can do with Zapier for social media automation includes posting to Facebook, Instagram, or LinkedIn. 
```

## Conclusion

> By leveraging the capabilities of Directus, from automated translations to content promotions, you have the bility to operate your blog effectively. These five automation strategies not only streamline your workflow but also ensure that you cut down on the actions you need to take between the writing and promotion process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By leveraging the capabilities of Directus, from automated translations to content posting, you have the ability to operate your blog effectively. These five automation strategies not only streamline your workflow but also ensure that you cut down on the actions you need to take between the writing and promotion process.
```
